In 1991, Linus Torvalds created Linux, an open-source operating system based on the UNIX operating system. Torvalds began the development of the Linux kernel on MINIX and applications written for MINIX were also used on Linux. Later, Linux matured and further Linux kernel development took place on Linux systems. GNU applications also replaced all MINIX components, because it was advantageous to use the freely available code from the GNU Project with the fledgling operating system; code licensed under the GNU GPL can be reused in other computer programs as long as they also are released under the same or a compatible license. Torvalds initiated a switch from his original license, which prohibited commercial redistribution, to the GNU GPL.Torvald decided to release Linux under the GPL license granting users significant freedoms, including the ability to modify and redistribute the software.

The adoption of Linux in production environments, rather than being used only by hobbyists, started to take off first in the mid-1990s in the supercomputing community, where organizations such as NASA started to replace their increasingly expensive machines with clusters of inexpensive commodity computers running Linux. Over time, due to Torvald’s decision to release Linux under the GPL license, Linux gained global popularity and fueled the rise of a commercial ecosystem around it. 

Companies like Red Hat and IBM invested heavily in Linux, leading to its widespread adoption. Commercial use began when Dell and IBM, followed by Hewlett-Packard, started offering Linux support to escape Microsoft's monopoly in the desktop operating system market.Today, Linux powers numerous critical systems, including stock exchanges, web servers, and supercomputers. 

The Linux development community continues to thrive with thousands of contributors and regular releases. Linus Torvalds, the creator of Linux, remains actively involved in its development from his home office in Portland, Oregon. Linus Torvalds is the lead maintainer for the Linux kernel and guides its development and individuals and corporations develop third-party non-GNU components. These third-party components comprise a vast body of work and may include both kernel modules and user applications and libraries.

