Computers have become essential for various aspects of modern life, from infrastructure operation to scientific advancement. Computing devices have evolved over time, from the abacus and astrolabe to electronic computers. Initially a job title for human calculators, the term "computer" gradually shifted to refer to devices in the 1800s.

One of the more notable of these devices was Gottfried Leibniz's Step Reckoner which worked as an automated mechanical calculator. He attempted to create a machine that could be used not only for addition and subtraction but would use a moveable carriage to enable multiplication and division, however, Leibniz did not incorporate a fully successful carry mechanism. This design was one of the first that could do all 4 operations and would become used for the next three centuries for calculator design. 

Unfortunately, even with mechanical calculators, most real-world problems required many steps of  computations before determining an answer which could be time-consuming to generate. Before the 20th century, people performed computations through pre-computed tables.These tables could be used for tasks like finding square roots while being faster and more accurate than hand calculations. This was especially important for military applications like artillery firing where calculations needed to be both fast and accurate. 

The problem with this is that when the design of the machine is changed, a whole-new pre-computed table had to be created which would also be very time-consuming and led to errors. Charles Babbage, an English mechanical engineer and polymath, originated the concept of a programmable computer. Often regarded as the "father of the computer", he conceptualized and invented the first mechanical computer in the early 19th century. After working on his revolutionary difference engine, he realized that a much more general design, an Analytical Engine, was possible.

The Analytical Engine was a general-purpose computer, not limited to one task, could be given data and run operations in sequence, and had a memory and a primitive printer. Like the Difference Engine, his idea was ahead of its time and was never fully built but inspired future generations. Ada Lovelace, who most consider the world's first programmer, wrote hypothetical programs for the Analytical Engine. The Analytical Engine would go on to inspire the first generation of computer scientists who incorporated these ideas into their machines.

By the end of the 19th century, the computing devices only found use for special-purpose tasks in science and engineering, but rarely seen in business, government or domestic life. The first application of computing devices in such scenarios was through Herman Hollerith's Punch Card Tabulating machine, which was an electro-mechanical machine that used punch cards to efficiently process data for the 1890 US census. That census was processed two years faster than the prior census had been. Hollerith's company eventually became the core of IBM and electro-mechanical business machines became a huge success, transforming commerce and government, and eventually setting the stage for digital computers.
