Today, Linux is prevalent, with over 850,000 Android phones and 700,000 TVs activated daily. Because of the dominance of Linux-based Android on smartphones, Linux, including Android, has the largest installed base of all general-purpose operating systems as of May 2022. Linux is the leading operating system on servers (over 96.4% of the top one million web servers' operating systems are Linux), leads other big iron systems such as mainframe computers, and is used on all of the world's 500 fastest supercomputers (as of November 2017, having gradually displaced all competitors). Linux powers 80% of financial trades and 90% of the world's supercomputers. Applications such as Google, Twitter, Facebook, and Amazon rely on Linux for their operations.

Linux development is collaborative, involving thousands of developers from hundreds of companies. Since 2005, 8,000 developers have contributed 15 million lines of code to the Linux kernel. The development of Linux is rapid, with major kernel releases every 2-3 months. This is made possible by a unique collaborative development process. When submitting code to the Linux kernel, developers break changes into individual units called patches. A patch describes the lines that need to be changed, added or removed from the source code. 

Developers post their patches to the relevant mailing lists, where other developers can reply with feedback. When the patch is close to being release-ready, it is accepted by a senior Linux kernel developer or maintainer, who manages one or more of the 100 different sections of the kernel. This unique collaborative development process ensures code quality and security.

Linus Torvalds is the lead maintainer for the Linux kernel and guides its development, while Greg Kroah-Hartman is the lead maintainer for the stable branch. Zoë Kooyman is the executive director of the Free Software Foundation, which in turn supports the GNU components. Finally, individuals and corporations develop third-party non-GNU components. These third-party components comprise a vast body of work and may include both kernel modules and user applications and libraries.
