Supervised learning, formally, is a machine learning approach where input feature objects are paired with labeled desired output in order to train a model. When this training data is processed, the model builds a function that maps new data to expected output values based on parameters that were learned through training. Essentially, we are giving the algorithm a dataset where each data point has “right answers” given, and the task of the algorithm is to produce more of these right answers.

One popular use case for this algorithm is for a regression problem, where you are trying to predict a continuous valued output based on the given inputs. For example, suppose your friend is looking to sell their house and looking to see how much their house is worth. What they have is a dataset consisting of labeled pairs of the sizes of houses and its associated price. A supervised learning algorithm will learn from these pairs and will try to learn a mapping from the sizes of a house to the price of a house from the dataset. The model can then be used to predict the value of your friend’s house based on the size of their house.

Another use case of supervised learning is for classification problems, where you are trying to predict a discrete value output. For example, they give a breast cancer diagnosis problem where you are trying to classify whether a tumor is malignant or benign. Given the size of the tumor and the age of the patient labeled with true answers, the model will learn a mapping that separates between classes and determine whether or not a new patient has a malignant or benign tumor.

Machine learning algorithms can utilize multiple features or attributes to make predictions, and for some problems, you want an “infinite” number of features or cues in order to make more accurate predictions. One of the ways you can achieve this is through the support vector machine mechanism, however, it is important to keep in mind that this might not be the case for other problems. You should have a number of features that are descriptive of the object. The number of features should not be too large, because of the curse of dimensionality; but should contain enough information to accurately predict the output.
