Unsupervised learning is a method in machine learning where, in contrast to supervised learning, algorithms learn patterns exclusively from unlabeled data. The machine, rather than learning the labels of each datapoint, clusters the data into distinct groups according to similar patterns in their input data. More precisely, the hope is that through mimicry, which is an important mode of learning in people, the machine is forced to build a concise representation of its world and then generate imaginative content from it. This type of learning is best suited for cases where you have large sets of data that are hard to label. 

Neural network tasks are often categorized as discriminative (recognition) or generative. Often but not always, discriminative tasks use supervised methods and generative tasks use unsupervised; however, the separation is very hazy. For example, object recognition favors supervised learning but unsupervised learning can also cluster objects into groups.

There are several different use cases for unsupervised learning. Google News contains a vast amount of new stories everyday and groups them into cohesive news stories using clustering to categorize news stories based on content. Unsupervised learning aids in understanding genomics by identifying patterns in gene expression data. Other applications include organizing computer clusters, social network analysis, market segmentation, and astronomical data analysis.

As an example of how unsupervised learning works, we present the cocktail party algorithm, which separates audio sources from single recordings without prior knowledge of the individual voices. Take an example where there are two sources occurring at once during a recording The unsupervised learning algorithm should look at recording and should discriminate the audio into two distinct clusters, each one matched with one of the audio sources. From there, we can then extract the different clusters and now we have a way to extract overlapped audio voices from a recording.

While this algorithm may seem long and complicated, the cocktail party algorithm can be done in one line of code using a proper programming environment. For this reason, this course will be using Octave, which is a free open-source programming environment that allows for the building of machine learning algorithms to be done in just a few lines of code. It is for this reason that people will first prototype their models on programming such as Octave since they are fast and easy to build. Only after successfully building in Octave do developers migrate to other languages.
